ABOUT THE AUTHOR, BSC, UPC AND GEMLEB MEETUP

About the Author

Jordi Torres is a professor at UPC Barcelona Tech and a research manager and senior advisor at Barcelona Supercomputing Center with a wide range of research and teaching activities for over 25 years. With a great background as a Computer Engineer, his explorer and entrepreneurial spirit have led him to be a Big-Data engineer able to engage with Data Scientists. Actually, his research focus is gradually moving from supercomputing architectures and runtimes to execution middleware’s for big data workloads, and more recently to platforms for Machine Learning on massive data. Right now, he also has a consultative and strategy role with a visionary task related to next generation technology and its impact. He is both a creative thinker and influential collaborator, and for that he has worn many hats throughout his long career. He acts as an expert for various organizations and companies and mentors entrepreneurs. He is also a writer, gives conferences and collaborates with Spanish mass media. He is passionate about art and visual design. More information about him can be found on his web page http://www.JordiTorres.Barcelona

About BSC

Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC) is the leading supercomputing center in Spain. It specialises in High Performance Computing (HPC) and its mission is two-fold: to provide infrastructure and supercomputing services to European scientists, and to generate knowledge and technology to transfer to business and society. BSC is a Severo Ochoa Center of Excellence and a first level hosting member of the European research infrastructure PRACE (Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe). BSC also manages the Spanish Supercomputing Network (RES). More information on page http://www.bsc.es

About UPC

The Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya · BarcelonaTech (UPC) is a public institution dedicated to higher education and research, specialised in the fields of engineering, architecture and science. The activity that goes on at UPC campuses and schools has made the University a benchmark institution. The University harnesses the potential of basic and applied research, and transfers technology and knowledge to society. As a leading member of international networks of excellence, the UPC has a privileged relationship with global scientific and educational organisations. More information on page http://www.upc.edu

About Grup d’Estudi de Machine Learning de Barcelona

The Grup d’Estudis de Machine Learning de Barcelona (GEMLeB) is an organization devoted to understand, discover and promote the use of Machine Learning in Barcelona, through an informal environment. As many other machine learning meetups, regular meetings are organized with a two-fold objective: learn about machine learning (from experiences, applications to algorithms, models and theory) and meet people with similar interest to build a wide and supporting community. If you ever come to Barcelona and want to meet the community, please do not hesitate to contact us! More information on page http://www.meetup.com/Grup-destudi-de-machine-learning-de-Barcelona

[contents link]
