FOREWORDS

The area of Machine Learning has shown a great expansion thanks to the co-development of key areas such as computing, massive data storage and Internet technologies. Many of the technologies and events of everyday life of many people are directly or indirectly influenced by automatic learning. Examples of technologies such as speech recognition, image classification on our phones or detection of spam emails, have enabled apps that a decade ago would have only sounded possible in science fiction. The use of learning in stock market models or medical models has impacted our society massively. In addition, cars with cruise control, drones and robots of all types will impact society in the not too distant future.

Deep Learning, a subtype of Machine Learning, has undoubtedly been one of the fields which has had an explosive expansion since it was rediscovered in 2006. Indeed, many of the startups in Silicon Valley specialize in it, and big technology companies like Google, Facebook, Microsoft or IBM have both development and research teams. Deep Learning has generated interest even outside the university and research areas: a lot of specialized magazines (like Wired) and even generic ones (such as New York Times, Bloomberg or BBC) have written many articles about this subject.

This interest has led many students, entrepreneurs and investors to join Deep Learning. Thanks to all the interest generated, several packages have been opened as “Open Source”. Being one of the main promoters of the library we developed at Berkeley (Caffe) in 2012 as a PhD student, I can say that TensorFlow, presented in this book and also designed by Google (California), where I have been researching since 2013, will be one of the main tools that researchers and SME companies will use to develop their ideas about Deep Learning and Machine Learning. A guarantee of this is the number of engineers and top researchers who have participated in this project, culminated with the Open Sourcing.

I hope this introductory book will help the reader interested in starting their adventure in this very interesting field. I would like to thank the author, whom I have the pleasure of knowing, the effort to disseminate this technology. He wrote this book (first Spanish version) in record time, two months after the open source project release was announced. This is another example of the vitality of Barcelona and its interest to be one of the actors in this technological scenario that undoubtedly will impact our future.

Oriol Vinyals, Research Scientist at Google Brain

[contents link]
