PREFACE

Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.
Nelson Mandela

The purpose of this book is to help to spread this knowledge among engineers who want to expand their wisdom in the exciting world of Machine Learning. I believe that anyone with an engineering background may find applications of Deep Learning, and Machine Learning in general, valuable to their work.

Given my background, the reader probably will wonder why I have proposed this challenge of writing about this new Deep Learning technology. My research focus is gradually moving from supercomputing architectures and runtimes to execution middleware’s for big data workloads, and more recently to platforms for Machine Learning on massive data.

Precisely by being an engineer, not a data scientist, I think I can contribute with this introductory approach to the subject, and that it can be helpful for many engineers in the early stages; then it will be their choice to go deeper into what they need.

I hope this book adds some value to this world of education that I love so much. I think that knowledge is liberation and should be accessible to all. For this reason, the content of this book will be available on the website www.JordiTorres.eu/TensorFlow completely free. If the reader finds the content useful and considers it appropriate to compensate the effort of the author in writing it, there is a tab on the website to make a donation. On the other hand, if the reader prefers to opt for a paper copy, you can purchase the book through Amazon.com portal.

A Spanish version is also available. Indeed, this book is the translation of the Spanish one, which was finished last January and it was presented in the GEMLeB Meetup (Grup d’Estudi de Machine Learning de Barcelona) of which I am one of the coorganizers.

Let me thank you for reading this book! It comforts me and justifies my effort for writing it. Those who know me, know that technological diffusion is one of my passions. It energizes and motivates me to keep learning.

Jordi Torres, February 2016

[contents link]
